---
layout: post
title: General DLT
---

<h4>DLT</h4>
<p style="font-size:18px">For clarity, DLT is the encompassing umbrella term and blockchain is a type of distributed ledger. The growing pervasiveness of DLT is due to the idea that a distributed system of database governance can facilitate greater data security, transparency, and privacy primarily by virtue of the append-only (i.e., immutable) data structure. Data is stored and shared across countless ledgers, each of which have the same records and are overseen by a distributed network of computer servers (nodes).</p>

<p style="font-size:18px">This is antithesis to the central governance system that is more prominent in the way that the internet infrastructure exists today, not to mention the pitfalls that may accompany it. Think Amazon Web Services outages: AWS, which provides web services such as storage, media capabilities, machine learning technology, and analytics tools to the most ubiquitous software companies today, controls <a href="https://www.forbes.com/sites/danrunkevicius/2020/09/03/how-amazon-quietly-powers-the-internet/?sh=2a35b1753092" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">33%</a> of the internet's cloud services, so when its data centres in a particular physical region are down, <a href="https://www.theverge.com/2021/12/22/22849780/amazon-aws-is-down-outage-slack-imgur-hulu-asana-epic" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">companies connected to those facilities collectively go down with it.</a></p>

<p style="font-size:18px">As of this moment, DLTs exist as blockchains, hashgraphs, directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), holochains, and TEMPO. Many popular DLTs such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, Solana, and Hyperledger are blockchains, with the other DLTs currently being much less adopted in practice. Each DLT, regardless of its type, requires a consensus mechanism and this ability to reach a consensus is the crux of a concept called Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT).</p>

<h4>BFT</h4>
<p style="font-size:18px">BFT describes a situation in which a distributed network of computing systems must be able to achieve an agreement on a broadcasted unit of information or state of the network, under the assumption that there exists faulty (due to miscommunication) or malicious nodes that will try to deceive the system with missing or incorrect information. Therefore, a system (a blockchain, a hashgraph, a DLT, etc.) is deemed to be Byzantine fault tolerant if it is able to operate without issue despite there being nodes that are unreliable.</p>

<h4>Consensus Mechanisms</h4>
<p style="font-size:18px">There are various approaches to being BFT-compliant, which is the role that consensus mechanisms play. 
blockchain and hashgraph consensus mechanisms being two examples amongst many. Proof-of-Work (PoW), notorious as of late for its significant energy consumption, requires the work of miners (nodes) to solve 
and Proof-of-Stake (PoS) are both 
</p>

<p style="font-size:18px">Blockchain's main hurdle is its inability to scale due to its sequential structure. Regardless of which consensus mechanism is used (proof of work, proof of stake, etc.), awaiting the confirmation of one block before proceeding with another leads to transaction being at a much slower rate than 
</p>

<h4>Cryptocurrency</h4>
<p style="font-size:18px">
The topic of transactions lends itself to the logical next discussion: the role of currencies.
</p>

<h4>Permission</h4>
<p style="font-size:18px">
Distributed ledgers can be categorized into permissioned and permissionless
</p>

<p style="font-size:18px">
Distributed ledgers may be permissioned or permissionless. This determines if anyone or only approved people can run a node to validate transactions. They also vary between the consensus algorithm – proof of work, proof of stake, voting systems and hashgraph. They may be mineable (one can claim ownership of new coins contributing with a node) or not (the creator of the cryptocurrency owns all at the beginning)
</p>

https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/distributed-ledger-technology-dlt.asp
https://101blockchains.com/distributed-ledger-technology/
https://www.allerin.com/blog/8-blockchain-consensus-mechanisms-you-should-know-about